# Kubernetes Kafka K8SKafka
This project contains a Docker image meant to facilitate the deployment of 
[Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/) on 
[Kubernetes](http://kubernetes.io/) using 
[StatefulSets](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/statefulset/). 

## Limitations
1. Persistent Volumes must be used. emptyDirs will likely result in a loss of 
data.
1. Storage media I/O isolation is not generally possible at this time. Consider 
using Pod Anti-Affinity rules to place noisy neighbors on separate Nodes.

## Docker Image
The docker image contained in this repository is comprised of a base 
Ubuntu 16.04 image using the latest release of the OpenJDK JRE based on the 1.8 
JVM (JDK 8u111), the latest stable release of Kafka (10.2.0) using Scala 2.11. 
Ubuntu is a much larger image than BusyBox or Alpine, but these images contain 
mucl or ulibc. This requires a custom version of OpenJDK to be built against a 
libc runtime other than glibc. While there are smaller Kafka images based 
on Alpine and BusyBox, the interactions between Kafka, the JVM, and glibc are 
better understood and easier to debug.

The image is built such that the Kafka JVM process is designated to run as a 
non-root user. By default, this user is kafka and has UID 1000 and GID 1000. 
The Kafka package is installed into the /opt/kafka directory, all 
configuration is installed into /opt/kafka/config and all executables are in 
/opt/kafka/bin. Due to the implementation of the scripts in /opt/kafka/bin, it 
is not feasible to symbolically link them into the /user/bin directory. As such,
the /opt/kafka/bin directory is added to the PATH environment variable.

## ZooKeeper
Kafka requires an installation of Apache Zookeeper for broker configuration 
storage and coordination. A example of how to deploy a ZooKeeper ensemble on 
Kubernetes can be found 
[here](https://github.com/ibagomel/helm-charts/tree/master/zookeper).
For testing purposes an ensemble of 1-3 servers is sufficient. For production 
use, you should consider deploying at least 5 servers so that you can tolerate 
the loss of one server during the planned maintenance of another. If you are 
running ZooKeeper on Kubernetes, it is best to use a separate ensemble for each 
Kafka cluster. For production use, you should ensure that each ZooKeeper server
has at least 2 GiB of heap with at least 4 GiB of reserved memory for the Pod. 
As ZooKeeper is not particularly CPU intensive, 2 CPUs per server should be 
sufficient for most use cases. If you are running Kubernetes on a Cloud 
Provider (e.g. GCP, Azure, or AWS), you should provision a fast storage class 
for the ZooKeeper PVs. As the PVs are backed by network attached storage, there
is little to be gained from isolating the write ahead log from the snapshots 
directory.

## Headless Service
The Kafka Stateful Set requires a Headless Service to control the network domain 
for the Kafka brokers. The yaml below creates a Headless Service that allows 
brokers to be discovered and exposes the 9093 port for client connections.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: kafka-svc
  labels:
    app: kafka
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 9093
    name: server
  clusterIP: None
  selector:
    app: kafka
 ```

## StatefulSet
The Kafka StatefulSet deploys a configurable number of replicas on the 
Kubernetes cluster. The StatefulSet serviceName must match the Headless Service
and specify the desired number of brokers.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1beta1
kind: StatefulSet
metadata:
  name: kafka
spec:
  serviceName: kafka-svc
  replicas: 3
  ...
 ```

 ## Configuration
 This section details the configuration of the Kafka cluster.
 
 ### Broker Configuration
 The configuration for each broker is generated by overriding the default 
 configuration with ConfigMap. The high and medium importance 
 configuration parameters form the 
 [Kafka documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#brokerconfigs).
 ```yaml
 command:
   - sh
   - -c
   - "exec kafka-server-start.sh /opt/kafka/config/server.properties --override broker.id=${HOSTNAME##*-}"
 ```
 ```yaml
 apiVersion: v1
 kind: ConfigMap
 metadata:
   name: kafka-cm
 data:
   server.properties: |
     listeners=PLAINTEXT://:9093
     zookeeper.connect=zk-svc.zookeper:2181/kafka
     log.dir=/var/lib/kafka
     auto.create.topics.enable=true
     auto.leader.rebalance.enable=true
     background.threads=10
     compression.type=producer
     delete.topic.enable=false
     leader.imbalance.check.interval.seconds=300
     leader.imbalance.per.broker.percentage=10
     log.flush.interval.messages=9223372036854775807
     log.flush.offset.checkpoint.interval.ms=60000
     log.flush.scheduler.interval.ms=9223372036854775807
     log.retention.bytes=-1
     log.retention.hours=168
     log.roll.hours=168
     log.roll.jitter.hours=0
     log.segment.bytes=1073741824
     log.segment.delete.delay.ms=60000
     message.max.bytes=1000012
     min.insync.replicas=1
     num.io.threads=8
     num.network.threads=3
     num.recovery.threads.per.data.dir=1
     num.replica.fetchers=1
     offset.metadata.max.bytes=4096
     offsets.commit.required.acks=-1
     offsets.commit.timeout.ms=5000
     offsets.load.buffer.size=5242880
     offsets.retention.check.interval.ms=600000
     offsets.retention.minutes=1440
     offsets.topic.compression.codec=0
     offsets.topic.num.partitions=50
     offsets.topic.replication.factor=3
     offsets.topic.segment.bytes=104857600
     queued.max.requests=500
     quota.consumer.default=9223372036854775807
     quota.producer.default=9223372036854775807
     replica.fetch.min.bytes=1
     replica.fetch.wait.max.ms=500
     replica.high.watermark.checkpoint.interval.ms=5000
     replica.lag.time.max.ms=10000
     replica.socket.receive.buffer.bytes=65536
     replica.socket.timeout.ms=30000
     replica.fetch.backoff.ms=1000
     replica.fetch.max.bytes=1048576
     replica.fetch.response.max.bytes=10485760
     request.timeout.ms=30000
     socket.receive.buffer.bytes=102400
     socket.request.max.bytes=104857600
     socket.send.buffer.bytes=102400
     unclean.leader.election.enable=true
     zookeeper.session.timeout.ms=6000
     zookeeper.set.acl=false
     broker.id.generation.enable=true
     connections.max.idle.ms=600000
     controlled.shutdown.enable=true
     controlled.shutdown.max.retries=3
     controlled.shutdown.retry.backoff.ms=5000
     controller.socket.timeout.ms=30000
     default.replication.factor=1
     fetch.purgatory.purge.interval.requests=1000
     group.max.session.timeout.ms=300000
     group.min.session.timeout.ms=6000
     inter.broker.protocol.version=0.10.2-IV0
     log.cleaner.backoff.ms=15000
     log.cleaner.dedupe.buffer.size=134217728
     log.cleaner.delete.retention.ms=86400000
     log.cleaner.enable=true
     log.cleaner.io.buffer.load.factor=0.9
     log.cleaner.io.buffer.size=524288
     log.cleaner.io.max.bytes.per.second=1.7976931348623157E308
     log.cleaner.min.cleanable.ratio=0.5
     log.cleaner.min.compaction.lag.ms=0
     log.cleaner.threads=1
     log.cleanup.policy=delete
     log.index.interval.bytes=4096
     log.index.size.max.bytes=10485760
     log.message.timestamp.difference.max.ms=9223372036854775807
     log.message.timestamp.type=CreateTime
     log.preallocate=false
     log.retention.check.interval.ms=300000
     max.connections.per.ip=2147483647
     num.partitions=1
     producer.purgatory.purge.interval.requests=1000
     reserved.broker.max.id=1000
  ```

- Note that the `broker.id` is extracted from the ordinal index of the 
StatefulSet's Pods.
- The `listeners` configuration must specify the port indicated by the headless 
service (9093 in this case).
- The `zookeeper.connect` string is a comma separated list of the `host:port` 
pairs of the ZooKeeper servers in the ensemble.

### OS Image tuning
For production use, it is important to configure the base OS image to allow 
for a sufficient number of file descriptors for your workload. 

- For each broker, `(partition) * (partition_size/segment_size)` determines 
the number of files the Broker will have open at any give time. You must 
ensure that this will not result in the Broker process dying because it has 
exhausted its allowable number of file descriptors.

### CPU
Typical production Kafka broker deployments run on dual processor Xeon's with 
multiple hardware threads per core. However, CPU is unlikely to be your 
bottleneck. An 8 CPU deployment should be more than sufficient for good 
performance. You should start by simulating your workload with 2-4 CPUs and 
titrating up from there. It is highly unlikely that CPU will be the bottleneck 
for your deployment.

### Memory
Kafka utilizes the OS page cache heavily to buffer data. To fully understand 
the interaction of Kafka and Linux containers you should read 
[this](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#design_filesystem) 
and [this](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/cgroup-v1/memory.txt). 
In particular, its is important to understand the accounting and isolation 
offered for the page cache for a mem cgroup. 
If your primary concern is isolation and performance you should do the 
following.

- Determine the number of seconds of data you want to buffer t (time).
- Determine the total write throughput of the deployment tp (storage/time). 
- tp * t gives the memory storage requirement that you should reserve. This 
should be set as the memory request for the container.

### Disk
Disk throughput is the most common bottleneck that users encounter with Kafka. 
Given that Persistent Volumes are backed by network attached storage, the 
throughput is, in most cases, capped on a per Node basis without respect to the 
number of Persistent Volumes that are attached to the Node. For instance, if 
you are deploying Kafka onto a GKE or GCP based Kubernetes cluster, and if you 
use the standard PD type, your maximum sustained per instance throughput is 
120 MB/s (Write) and 180 MB/s (Read). If you have multiple applications, each 
with a Persistent Volume mounted, these numbers represent the total achievable
throughput. If you find that you have contention you should consider using 
Pod Anti-Affinity rules to ensure that noisy neighbors are not collocated on the 
same Node.

### Pod Affinity
The Kafka Pod in the StatefulSet's `PodTemplateSpec` contains a Pod Anti-Affinity
and a Pod Anti-Affinity rule.

```yaml
    affinity:
        podAntiAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
            - labelSelector:
                matchExpressions:
                  - key: "app"
                    operator: In
                    values: 
                    - kafka
              topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
        podAffinity:
          preferredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
             - weight: 1
               podAffinityTerm:
                 labelSelector:
                    matchExpressions:
                      - key: "app"
                        operator: In
                        values: 
                        - zk
                 topologyKey: "kubernetes.io/hostname"
```

The Pod Anti-Affinity rule ensures that two Kafka Broker's will never be 
launched on the same Node. This isn't strictly necessary, but it helps provide 
stronger availability garauntees in the presence of Node failure, and it helps 
alleviate [disk throughput](#disk) bottlenecks.
The Pod Affinity rule attempts to collocate Kafka and ZooKeeper on the same 
Nodes. You will likely have more Kafka brokers than ZooKeeper servers, but the 
Kubernetes scheduler will attempt to, where possible, collocate Kafka brokers 
and ZooKeeper servers while respecting the hard spreading enforced by the 
Pod Anti-Affinity rule. This optimization attempts to minimize the amount of 
network I/O between the ZooKeeper ensemble and the Kafka cluster. However, if 
disk contention becomes an issue, it is equally valid to express a Pod 
Anti-Affinity rule to ensure that ZooKeeper servers and Kafka brokers are not 
scheduled onto the same node.

## Testing
The easies way to test your deployment is to use the create a topic and use the 
console producer and consumer.
Use `kubectl exec` to execute a bash shell on one of the brokers.

```shell
> kubectl exec -ti kafka-0 -- bash
```

From the command line create a topic using `kafka-topics.sh`

```shell
> kafka-topics.sh --create \
--topic test \
--zookeeper zk-0.zk-svc.default.svc.cluster.local:2181,zk-1.zk-svc.default.svc.cluster.local:2181,zk-2.zk-svc.default.svc.cluster.local:2181 \
--partitions 3 \
--replication-factor 2
```

Run the console consumer as below.
```shell
> kafka-console-consumer.sh --topic test --bootstrap-server localhost:9093
```

Use `kubectl exec` to execute a bash shell on another one of the brokers. You 
can use the same broker, but using a different broker will demonstrate that 
the system is working across multiple Nodes.

```shell
> kubectl exec -ti kafka-1 -- bash
```

Run the console producer and generate a few messages by typing into `stdin`. 
Every time you press `Enter` you will flush a message to the consumer.

```shell
> kafka-console-producer.sh --topic test --broker-list localhost:9093
hello
I like kafka
goodbye
```

You will see the messages on the console in which the console consumer is 
running.

```shell
> kafka-console-consumer.sh --topic test --bootstrap-server localhost:9093
hello
I like kafka
goodbye
```

## Horizontal Scaling
You can use `kubectl scale` to horizontally scale your cluster. The below will 
scale the number of brokers to two.

```shell
> kubectl scale statefulset kafka --replicas=2
```

You should note that, when you scale a Kafka cluster up or down you will have 
to use `kafka-reassign-partitions.sh` to ensure that your data is correctly 
replicated and assigned after scaling.
